Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Costica Bradaan. He is
a professor of humanities in the Honors College at
Texas Tech University and an honorary research professor of
philosophy at the University of Queensland in Australia. And
today we're talking about his book In Praise of
Failure, Four Lessons in Humility. So Costica, welcome to
the show. It's a big pleasure to everyone.
Thank you for inviting me.
So I would like to start by asking you,
what is failure
exactly? What is failure? I guess we all know
it, uh, when we see it, right? But it's
sometimes we may have problems trying to define it.
The definition I end up using um was a
combination of etymology and phenomenology. Obviously, when you define
failing, you have to bring in, bring in success
as well. So to, to define success, I went
to the etymology of the word, which in English
as, as in other modern languages, European languages comes
from the Latins of cheddar, which means that the
fact that one thing, one thing comes after another.
We are used to this pattern, right? Things happen
in a certain order, chronological order. So that succession
is something that we get from experience, something we
get from observing the world around. And when that
succession does not take place, precisely because we, we
have those expectations, we, we are left with a
feeling of frustration of the disruption of, of Of
disappointment and that's failure. So that's where phenomenology kicks
in because uh my approach more or less is
kind of ground in in phenomenology. So I, I
was, I, I, in the book, I was very
interested in how we respond, how the self responds
to this experience of, of disruption, discomfort, and so
on. Mhm.
And in the book, you go through 4 different
kinds of failure, and for each of them, you
have one prominent figure that you associate with each
type of failure. You talk about physical failure, political
failure, social failure, and biological failure. So why these
four different types of failure? Why do you focus
on this one specifically?
Well, because of the word, to some extent, because
of the word itself, which in English kind of
cover so much ground, unlike other other languages, uh,
where we have different words for different types of
failure, in English, we have only one, and indeed,
we have the same, that same word, even for
the agent who fails. We call somebody a failure,
right? So I needed this kind of, I needed
some kind of division, some kind of Uh, um,
some kind of subdivisions of failure, types of failure,
otherwise it would have been unmanageable, but also I
needed some kind of organizing principle, the book needs
to have chapters and needs to have, you know,
uh, some kind of progressive order of progression, right?
So I start with again, phenomenological with that kind
of failure that's most remote from remote from us,
the failure of things, the physical failure. It's remote
not not necessarily spatially, it's remote in terms of,
of what we really are and what things are,
if, if, um, if um some engine, you know,
the car engine breaks down. Even if it happens
in my proximity, that piece of, you know, machinery
is quite remote from who, what I am or
who I am as a human being. So that's
the most remote. And then the next one would
be uh political failure, which is again, it's still
remote in the sense that we are, we may
be, you know, political beings, but we don't always
engage in politics. It's kind of it's a special
field, it's a special activity, it's a special. Uh,
TYPE of attitude and so on. We may well,
you know, live whole our whole lives without, you
know, being engaged in politics. I'm not saying it's
a good thing, but it may well happen. Then
the next is a social failure, which is kind
of even, it's even closer in the sense that
unavoidably, we, we, we are, we, we engage socially,
we, we, we are socially. Yeah, society structures as
you know, in a quite a profound way, even
if, let's imagine you, you kind of take, uh,
going to some retreat away from the world, right,
away from society, away from everybody and still society
is with you. Society follow, follows you even there
because you speak a language which is a social
thing, right? And to even to think in so
you you you employ that language, which makes you
social. And finally, uh there is a layer. Um,
EVEN closer and, and in my, in my book
is the closest, it's the ultimate, I call it
the ultimate failure, biological fate in the sense that
it's really, it's death, right? It's, uh, it's failure,
the failure of the body. It's our mortality. It's,
it's how we end. Um, BUT those were, I'm
not saying they're arbitrary, um, but they're, they're not
all, they're not all the types of fate one
can think of. I have to make a selection,
the book need, need to have some kind of
to be finite, to be, to be able to
be brought to completion, right? So I may well,
I may well uh uh come up with others
just for, for that particular purpose, I, I, I
ended up with 4.
So when it comes to physical failure, the figure
you focus the most on, and I hope I'm
pronouncing her name correctly, Simon Weil, uh, so she
represents at least in your view, and as far
as I understood, I understood it, uh. WAYS of
clumsiness and pursuing the the intellectual life instead of
the practical life. So, tell us a little bit
about her and what she represents in terms of
failure and the lessons we can draw from her
life.
Before, before doing that, I, I guess I, uh,
I, I, I suspect we, we owe our viewers
some explanation of, of a more methodological nature. Um,
FOR each of those, so those types of failure
correspond to four different chapters in the book, which
I, uh, call, you know, the circles of failure.
But to, to make that point, to, to, you
know, to make, to, to talk about those type
of, types of failure, I want, I wanted to
bring in in every single one of those four
circles. I wanted to bring in some real human
being, somebody, uh, a person, you know, who, who,
uh, who lived and died and, and, and, and
experienced that particular kind of failure or who had
a special relationship to that kind of failure. Uh,
THE reason is that I wanted this to be,
um, well, it is a philosophy book, in an
important sense. But I, I then, I didn't want
it to be confined to philos philosophical readers only.
I wanted to have some broader appeal and to
make it more accessible and more um uh more
relevant, more relevant for people who are interested in,
in the humanities and the big questions, not necessarily,
you know, not just professional philosophers or students of
philosophy. So in every single one of those chapters,
I do have a story. So there is every
single, everywhere throughout the book, I, I kind of,
I use this, this double tier. There is one
layer of text, which is augmentative, it's, it's, it's,
it's philosophical in the conventional sense. I make an
argument or prove a point or whatever. And then
second layer is this narrative. It's kind of, it's
a story, it's an unfolding story of somebody, right?
Um, AND they, they go together alternatively, so I,
I, I, there is a, there's a couple of
pages on, um, uh. On physical failure, and then
I have the story of Simone Weil, and then
I go back to the argument, you know, about
the physical failure and then again. So it's just
back and forth, which kind of, it's also serves
to give the reader a sense of uh rhythm,
but also a sense of some uh a certain
amount of time to think about, you know, to
process, to digest whatever um um he or she
maybe, maybe reading there. So to go back to
your finally to your question, um, Simonee was a
fashion, is a fascinating figure to study, to explore,
to think about. Um, SHE could be approached from
different angles. She, she means so many things, she
did so many things. She was a social activist
and she was a philosopher, a mystic, a theologian,
and so many things. From my point of view,
from the point of view of this book. She
was an extraordinary case of, of, of failure, even
if she was a very successful person, you know,
in her life. In some respects, in some respects,
in others, she chose to be a failure. She
She quit at some point, for example, she quit
her, her job, her teaching job to be as
a, you know, you know, in the French system
of education, to be an unskilled labor to work
in a factory as, as, as, as an ordinary,
not just, not just as an ordinary worker, but
as somebody at the, as the lowest possibility. So
on the, you know, the lowest, uh, um, um,
scale in terms of payment, in terms of, uh,
of, of qualifications and in terms of skills and
so on. So, she wanted to experience, she wanted
first of all to know what was like to
be a worker. Everybody was talking about the working
class, working conditions of, of the French people and
so on, and everybody was there, there's so much
just like today, there's so much political politics involved
around her. And but she wanted for once to,
to go and see, right, to, to actually witness
how those, what, how those workers were leading their
lives and what their daily lives in in fact
in the factory were like and to produce to
come up with an account. So she came back
and wrote what she experienced there. What's interesting, and
that's again, go back to your question is that
as a person, she was a profoundly clumsy person.
She was, she was not suited for that kind
of work. She was a brilliant intellectual, a great
mind. Particularly gifted for, for foreign languages, for example,
for classics, for philosophy and so on, but not
for that kind of labor, and yet, and yet
she chose precisely that kind of activity to, to,
to, to make a point, to understand the difficulty
of, of the, of the, of the person, you
know, the assembly line, uh uh spending their lives
in very hard conditions and um she wanted, of
course, to, to transcend her limits, her limits in
the sense of Uh, I don't know, learning to
live with her natural clumsiness, but also the limits
she wanted to understand, to better understand the limits
of the human condition itself. So you do have
that case of clumsiness, which for me is a,
is a very interesting case of failure. OF the
physicality of our, of the world, right? It's, it's,
it's something that happens when we are simply, we
find ourselves, ourselves ill equipped to deal with the
problem, to grasp something, to, to manage something, and
it's, it's, it's, no matter how much learning, you,
you invest in that, how much effort you make,
there is a point that you cannot just, you,
you cannot uh uh move on over. Uh, BECAUSE
it's, it's, it's, you are naturally clumsy and that,
that's a, that's an interesting case of, of failure
where the body and the physicality of the world
is, is heavily involved. So,
but what kinds of lessons or positive lessons can
we draw from that example?
Well, uh, I, I would be reluctant to talk
about lessons. Well, even if it's in the title
of the book, of course, it's a, but the,
the lessons that the title refer to are a
bit broader. It's a, there are some kind of
There are philosophical lessons, there are lessons of, of
a, of a, of a, of a different nature
than, you know, practical lessons that you can learn
from, you know, something or other. Uh, THE lessons
she learned. First of all, was something very specific
about how the French working class was, was um
treated or rather mistreated by, by society, by politicians,
by, by factory owners and so on. So, so
she, she, she learned something very specifically in terms
of, of, uh, you know, sociologically, uh, psychologically. In
terms of, of, of uh policies, if you like,
uh, from that experience. But of course, much more
importantly, Again, she's a very special because she's such
a special person. She learned a lot about theology.
She went into the factory to learn about the
working class, the working conditions of the French, you
know, workers. But she came back a mystic. She
came back almost converted, not necessarily to Christianity, but
to kind of a spiritual, highly spiritual way of
life. She went, she was looking for the French
work uh uh worker and ended up discovering Jesus
Christ because the way in which she describes the
condition of the work. Of the workers kind of
is very because as you, as you read those
texts, the, the, the her diaries and so on,
you, you, it's the language becomes more and more
uh uh religious religiously charged and eventually she, she,
she kind of she sees herself, you know, there
in the factory as a slave. But it's, it's
that language of slave is not, of course, she
knew what slave slavery was. She, she had studied
the, the classics and, and the, you know, the,
the, the Asian world where there's, there were so
many slaves around. But more importantly, she, for her
slave had a theological meaning very much like in
the gospel where, where you read that, you know,
Jesus Christ came into the world as a slave.
So that's, that's where, that's the meeting that, that's
the encounter that happens there. Um SHE is Simone
V discovers Jesus Christ under this, this unexpected guise
of, of, of the, of the worker of the
humble oppressed, over oppressed worker. Mhm.
So, uh let me ask you, uh, because this
is something that you get into when you talk
about her life as well, but as you said,
you go through some of the philosophical aspects and
then you also go through the life of the
people you explore in the book. What effects do
you think, uh things working flawlessly with us? I
mean, what kinds of effects would perfection have on
us? Do you think it could be something negative?
Yeah, that's one of the points I, I, I
make there. There is a sense in which if
nothing breaks down, if everything works smoothly forever, we
ended up useless. We, and there's no, there'll be
no room for us there because it's kind of
um It's the system, the work, you know, the,
the, the things are self-sufficient. There's no, no room
for us, no need for us. We ended up,
you know, as some kind of uh appendix, you
know, unnecessary and, and, and, and useless and so
on. But more important, that's one aspect, we can
just take a break and go somewhere and read
a book or do something interesting. But more importantly,
if If we place ourselves in situations where there
is too much perfection or there is perfection, that
affects our minds, that affects the way in which
we function, you know, internally because it's kind of,
um, we, we, we stop, we stop paying attention
to things. We, what, what I, I'm trying to
say is that we need to be To be
challenged. We need to, we need to be, you
know, we need to wake up. We need events,
we need occasion, uh, you know, uh, occasions to
wake us up, to, to make us think, to
take, to make us make a decision. We need
to become aware, otherwise, we, we, we fall asleep.
Uh, THIS, this, this, this regularity, this, we, we,
because of how things are, we, we end up
living in a pat, you know, inside and within
a, a, a heavily patterned existence. Everything is, is
in, comes in patterns. We, and which is good,
which is natural, right? It's life itself has this,
this, this tendency to, to happen to take place
in patterns and we develop patterns when, when, when
solving problems, when leading our life, we cannot afford
every day to do something to start from scratch
our lives, to reinvent our lives completely. We need
those patterns, but when, when those patterns kind of
take over. Kind of when they occupy too much
of our lives, there is this danger that we
become useless and we, we, we in turn become
routine. We become uh kind of automated, automate, we
need to stay alive. We need to remain spontaneous
and that automation which first comes in the outside
world, we, we, we, we call it, we, we,
we build, you know, we, we invest in automation,
right? But somehow there is a, there is a
strange process where we, we, we ended up automated
in, in, in our own minds. Much of, of
what's going on inside our heads is becomes a
form of automation. And that's, that's, um, that's a
problem, I think. We, we cannot afford, we, if
we, if we fall victim to that kind of
automation, uh, we, we kind of, we, we, we,
we die little by little. Uh, WHILE, while still
alive technically. Right.
So then you get into the topic of political
failure and the main figure here is Mohandas Gandhi.
But before we get into Gandhi himself, why do
you think that we are drawn to political movements?
Um, IN what sense? I mean,
I, I, I mean,
because specific to certain kinds of political movements or
uh, I,
I mean if existentially speaking there are particular reasons
why we feel drawn to being part of political
movements if we get some meaning out of them
or something like that.
Well, I guess that's a good point. Uh, IT'S
an interesting question. It's a, it's a modern, it's
a kind of a post-renaissance thing before, uh, even
if we are political animals and we are, we've
always been, we've always been interested in politics. Up
to, let's say the Renaissance, only a limited number
of people who are doing politics. You are, if,
if you're a king or a pope or, uh,
you know, adviser to the king or to the
pope, you are actively doing politics. Most of the
other people were not involved. They were, you know,
silent, uh. Not participants. They were spectators. They were
just witness in the best of cases, as witnesses
and the politics were, was done, you know, uh,
without them, but with the, with democrat, well, of
course, you do have in the ancient Greece, but
those are exceptions. But through, you know, from the
modern, uh from with modernity, there we have the,
this very different ways, uh, different ways of understanding
politics and especially comes with the parliamentary Uh, with
parliamentary democracies where politics is no longer done by
a very limited number of people, but by more
and more. First, there are males, male citizens, and
you have women and you have other classes and
so on. And today, pretty much except for uh
children who are, or um non-citizens, today it's expected
that everybody has to do to get involved in
politics. We don't, and that's a, that's a pity
because we should, there should be more of us
who, who go to, you know, who vote. Um,
THAT'S one thing, right? But I guess the question
can also have a, a different layer in the
sense of why we are we attracted to radical
movements I guess. Yes, it's why it's interesting, I
guess it's connected because it's, uh, if, if politics
was not accessible at all, uh, there'd be no
point in getting involved in radical movements. On politics
was democratized, you know, let's say. What's, I guess
after the French Revolution, right, why politics was, was,
was spacious enough to, to, uh, you know, to,
to embrace a number of, a large number of,
of actors, we do have those, those forms of
radical involvement. I mean that's interesting. I it's, uh,
it depends on so many things, right? It's It's,
it can be uh the expression of a failure
in the sense that the failure of, of the
democratic process we have. For some reason, you know,
people are, or some people are, are, are left,
they feel that they are left without options. They,
they have to do something radical. Just voting, uh,
you know, every 4 years or every 2 years
is not enough or you know, standing up or
But uh um For, for elections, but somehow they,
those, there are people who want to do more
to kind of participate in, in, in forms of
political life that are not part of that process.
They want to do a revolution, they want to
do, I don't know, coup d'etat, I don't know,
it's a Because, because of the, I, I don't
know, because of some form of impatience that they,
they cannot wait for 4 more years. They want
to do it now because of a lack of
trust in the political process. They don't trust the
system that they want to do it their own
way. Um, BECAUSE of their, I don't know, rebellious
nature, they, they don't want any procedures, they don't
want to follow any, anything, they just, uh, um,
they want to kind of Um, you know, demolish
the system and, and, and, and, and, and perhaps
uh create something new from scratch. I don't know.
But it's a good question, so it's um.
So, uh, getting into Gandhi, what were the several
different ways that he experienced political failure?
Well, before I get there, I just, uh, He
had a quite an intimate relationship to failure in
the sense that even before he was actively involved
in politics, he wrote his autobiography, which was published
when he was still, he, he just got back
from South Africa, back, back to India, and it
was 1925, I think when he published that book.
So it's again, it's, so the biggest, you know,
accomplishment, his, his biggest accomplishments were ahead of him.
HAD not happened yet. And yet he felt this
need to write his autobiography to, to come up
with a story, right, of his, of his failures
because it's a very strange book. It's, it's an
interesting, a very strange book in the sense that
it's a, it's an account of his, of his,
of, of a long, you know, of his long
history of engagement with failure of one kind or
another. He, he complains uh forever, endlessly, he complains
that he was a terrible kid. He was, uh,
he, he, he was such a terrible, you know,
uh uh uh uh student, and then he was
a terrible husband, he was a terrible father and
so on and so on. But of course that's
his own account, right? That that's his own story.
When, when, no matter how harsh you are with
yourself, when you are the one who, who, who
produces the story, uh, you, you, you are in
charge, you, you, you have some control, it's, it's,
you know. What to select, what, what to put
in there and what to give out, and so
on. So there is, it's not a totally innocent
uh process there. And of course, after that, we
have the Gandhi, we know, we all know, right?
The Gandhi, the Gandhi, the public person, Gandhi Gandhi,
uh, uh, you know, the, the Mahama, uh, the
new, the face of India, of, of, of the
struggling of the India. STRUGGLING for independence. It's a,
and we do have a series of failures, uh,
starting from, you know, small things like the way
in which he dealt with his asso some of
his associates who, who, who left him were unhappy
because of his style, political style and, and, and.
And, and so on, but the biggest would come
later and they would somehow involve him and his
life as well and says that he was killed
eventually because of some of those failures. It's uh
his murder, his assassination was in a way the
expression. Or spectacular, the physical expression of, of those
failures. He, he was in the end, he was
perceived as a, as a, as a traitor by
some Indians as, as an ineffective figure, as, as,
as somebody who kind of messed everything up, even
if the country had become independent now, right? Um.
It's, it's a, it's a, there's so many of
them. So, in the book, I, I try to
cover some. The book was not, of course, about
Gandhi per se. He was, he's one of, one
of the characters. So I, I, I kind of,
I had to make a selection and focus on,
on some of them. So it's, there's the failures
of Gandhi, the politician, um, that I paid some
attention to. They are the failures of Gandhi, the,
the The guru, because he was also a spiritual
master, he wanted to teach Indians how to live
better lives, how to redeem themselves, how to, uh,
uh, become spiritually superior and, and I don't know,
um, and the failures of, as he himself said,
of Gandhi, the, the, the husband, Gandhi, the father,
and so on. So I'm not sure we have
time to go with all those details, but that
those would be some of them.
Mhm. But I, I mean, generally speaking, what do
you think that the political life of Gandhi teaches
us about the value of failure in the political
realm and how to approach politics?
Uh, Good question. Um, WHAT I try to do
there. Even if it's not immediately intuitive. I connect,
or, or people don't expect that to, to, to
be done. I connected Gandhi to a certain kind
of utopia, bad utopianism. So I go, I went
back to his, to his uh Hins barrage, the
book he wrote while he was still in South
Africa. Hinzarage a very important, very interesting. Also disturbing
book because well before he, he, he moved back
to India, well before he was a, you know,
a fighter for independence, Gandhiro there, some, some very
strange things. It was a anti-Western manifesto, anti, not
just anti-Western, anti-modern manifesto in which, for example, he
He blames for the ills of India, of, of,
you know, colo colonial India. He blames England, of
course, the British Empire, but more specifically, he blames
Uh, certain features of the Western civilization, of which,
uh, uh, England was part, namely, he blames, uh,
railways, doctors, lawyers, It's a very strange argument he
makes, um, he makes because he is saying that,
well, because of those things, India isn't in the
state in which it is, all those things, I
say, yeah, and he, he comes up with very
strange arguments and, and, and, and, and odd examples
like I don't know, because of the trains, because
of the trains, uh there is hunger and poverty
in India. How come? Well, because of the trains,
because we have railways and trains, you know, individual
farmers can ship away their, you know, their crops
and they can sell them, you know, for a
better price elsewhere, and which means that the local
community, you know, of that, of those farmers would
remain without enough, enough to eat. Uh, ALSO because
of the, because of the, of the trains, you
know, people, people move around, people travel, right? And
along with them, travel, you know, you know, bacteria
and, and micro microbes and so on. So they,
they, the, the, basically what, what he's saying, trains
and railways spread disease. And the same with doctors.
It's, uh, the doctors are, you can, uh, I
don't remember some of the phrases, I think some
diabolical figures for him because why? Because they do
the desection from Gandhi, there was a, there was
no way, so to, you know, to produce some,
some kind of, you know, medicine, you have to
test it first and you will test it on
animals and for him, that was a, that was
an absolute crime. And, um, and, and, and so
on and so forth, and so on and so
forth. It's a very, very peculiar book. So, to
go back to your original point, he has a
solution for that. So all those eels, you know,
which he identified. IN, in that book could be
removed, could be, uh, you know, uh solved by
kind of resurrecting this India of uh this, this
classical Indian civilizations where of course there are no
trains and no doctors and no lawyers, but somehow
uh is a pure place, a place where people
live spiritually and so forth. So that's, that, that's
kind of to me, that's a, that reads like
an utopia was he was. Being here in utopianism
and What, that was right, as we, as we
discussed earlier, that was first, it was in the
early 20th century. Decades later, when he goes back
to India and in a position to kind of
design politically the, the, the, the independent India, he
tries to put that, some of that into practice,
and it was a disaster. I mean, And to,
to, if I am, if I can use, you
know, one word is purity here. We don't, so
he was obsessed with purity, including political purity and,
and, and, and, and perfection, of course. What he
wanted was a perfect country, was a perfect India,
was a perfect pure, perfect community, and that was,
that was a problem because Such things cannot happen,
uh, uh, uh, while, you know, in this world,
we are not pure, we can never be. We
are not perfect, we can never be perfect and,
and so on. So to, to try to, to
kind of, you know, bring them into, into being,
into existence, some kind of utopian project where you
claim that this community, this society is perfect. That's
a, that's a, that's a very dangerous political project.
And of course, I, I kind of I tell
his story uh alongside with the, the French Revolution
and the Russian Revolution where we have similar, similar
attempts of, of, of, of creating this, this perfect,
perfect society where there's no exploitation, no equality. So
no inequality and so on, but in the process,
they would exploit a lot. They would kill millions,
they would destroy everything. How, how is that possible?
So you have this something at the very core
of the, there is something at the very core
of the utopian project that that profoundly undermines it.
Mhm.
So, and now talking about social failure, the main
figure you bring into the book is Emil Shuan.
So, could you tell us why you I, I
mean, tell us a little bit about Shiran and
why you chosen to represent social failure.
Because I love him. Uh, HE was, uh, he
was such, I mean, we are, he was a
fellow Romanian, and I, I had this, I, I
knew of him long before I, I had my
infatuation with his work. He's a, he's a classic
here. Uh, HE'S such an interesting, so he, he's
intrins, his work is, you know, intrinsically interesting and
interesting and valuable. But then his life story was,
you know, likewise, uh, uh, compelling. Um, AND I
kind of sketch his biography in, in, in my
book, I had to kind of present some of,
some of the episodes, some of the more memorable
episodes of his life, of his life. He was
um very early on, he, he became infatuated with
with the Nazis, for example, a brilliant man, highly
gifted and so on, he goes to Germany to
finish his, you know, to, to finish his uh
uh education, graduate education, and he gets, he gets
um, he, he falls in love in love with
Hitler. He wakes up, uh, that would last for
a few years. Uh, HE, he wakes up. Then
he gets infatuated with the Romanian uh iron guard,
which is the local, the local fascist movement. And
so after a number of failure of political failures
like this. He decides to kind of to stay
away from politics altogether. He moved to France, adopts
French as his language. He had been working before
in Romanian and German, uh, both of which he
spoke perfectly, but now, now he, he, he feels
he has this need to kind of, uh, choose
a third language, a totally new language to him,
in which you become a, a, a, a really
good. Uh, uh, um, PERFORMER because he's, he's French
as, as, as anyone would, you know, any French
speaker will tell you is, is, is, is, is,
is splendid and, and, and, and, and, and, and,
and memorable and, and, and his steps that are,
are com complex stylistically and, and, and, uh, and
of course philosophical as well. So he comes to
France to technically do his PhD or uh some
PhD. But he, from the very beginning, he has
this idea that he will never finish. He will
never write a dissertation. He said his plan was
to move to Paris and live the life of
a parasite. He would, he would only, he wanted,
he only wanted access to, you know, to the
student cafeteria and dorms and so on to be,
you know, to live Chile in Paris, that, that
was all he was after. Um, SO he, his
life now enters a new phase. He's no longer
political, you know, he's, he has become quite Distinctly
apolitical, and he, his life has a new dimension,
a new style. He's like a digenist. He's a
civic in, in, in Paris. uh uh DOES not
belong, does not have any belongings, does not belong
to any school, any institution. He lives off uh
I don't know, uh um charities, uh he lives
uh uh uh very humbly, but philosophical. He's very
proud of that kind of life. He writes back,
he writes home, his letters to his parents are,
are kind of, you know, uh expressed this, this,
this, this sense of, of accomplishment. I'm, I'm very
happy like, like this. And that's when he writes
those uh French books starting with, in the late
40s. When, you know, one after the other, they,
they come out and, and then reveal this, this
new thinker, new kind of thinker. He was, he
was hailed as a, as a, as a, as
a, as a, as a fresh thinker by, by
a number of, you know, critics and he got
uses, for example, realized, you know, he, he's transport
and so on. Um, HE would never have a
proper job and toward the end of his life,
there are some interviews which I used. He would,
you know, he would be very proud of, of,
of never having had a proper job. He would
say at some point, that's my biggest accomplishment. That's
my biggest accomplishment. The fact that they never had
to, to have a job that I haven't, that,
that I didn't have to destroy myself with an
office job, with a career. So he was, uh,
he was an, not an outcast because nobody, nobody
kind of rejected him. He was, he placed himself
at the, at the margins and uh as a,
you know, distant observer, uh um as a contemplator,
he would not have any kind of Uh, commercial,
you know, engagement with the world, you would not
make a living, you would not be a good
consumer, a good citizen, and that put him in
a position to observe, to see how, how things
happened, how per you know, the French, the Frenchmen.
HIM were leading their lives and, and, and, and
spending and, and, and, and, and, you know, engaging
in, in capitalism, whereas he was, he, all that
time he was an observer, which was again, gave
him plenty of insight. You could tell as you
read those his books from, from the later period.
He was a good observer of, of the, of
the French life and not just the French, but
the modern Western civilization. Mhm.
But I, I mean, looking at his life and
his philosophy, do you think that it tell us
and when it comes to raising failure as you
do in your book, what do you think it
tells us about how we think about what it
means to be successful in life?
Excellent. Yeah. Well, it's, it's kind of, it's, it's
it. It's on an on an alternative viewpoint. It's
a very important, very, um, it's a, it's a
compelling alternative viewpoint. The viewpoint of somebody who chooses
not to get, to get involved, somebody who, who,
who decides not to have a job, not to
be, you know, a productive member of, of, of
society. It's a, it's a very different lifestyle from,
from the mainstream. We all, you know, we aspire
to have career from careers from the very beginning.
We are, we are, we are set up, we
are wired to become, you know, to compete, to,
to acquire, to, to possess, to, to move up,
to, to kind of uh uh out um uh
outwit, outdo, out, out, outspend the others. It's, it's,
it's, it's a, it's a, uh, it's not, it's
a life that, of course, we, we are all
doing, but it's not the, I don't think it's
the best life we can, we can run and
others like him because he may be a singular
figure, he may be a, you know, uh um
A very special case, but he's not unique. There,
there have been others. Uh, THERE have been others
like him, and we have in literature, we have
some examples and, uh, um, for example, in, in,
in, in, in Russian literature, uh, Goncharov has a
brilliant novel, uh exactly about this kind of, this
kind of uh The life of, of an Adler,
idler. Um, SOMEBODY who chooses not to do anything.
It's a, you know, not doing stuff, not, not
leading this, you know, profitable life, uh, not being,
choosing not to be a consumer, uh, is, is
a radical choice which very few of us would,
would be able to make, but a very, to
me, uh uh uh. A very telling choice. We,
we, we have a lot to learn from, from
somebody who chooses, chooses to occupy that position. I,
I would say I would, I would, I would
pay attention to anyone who does that precisely because
I am myself not able to do it. It's,
it's somebody who goes against the strict system, somebody
who, who, who, who, who Who decides to kind
of undermine the whole thing. It's really, it's somebody
I really need to understand that, that, that point
of view because that would help understand my own
our own positions when it comes to, you know,
productive lives and so on. Uh, IT'S also more,
more, more important, I would say. That's the life
of contemplation. It's a very important uh lifestyle in
the sense that you have for centuries, you know,
east and west and and and ancient times and
in more recent times, we have this figure of
the contemplator and think of the Buddhist monks, think
of the, you know, fathers of the, of the
church of the, you know, the desert fathers. It's
It's, it's this life where you choose not to
possess anything, not to, to, uh, not to work,
not to be active, instead, you want to understand,
you want to contemplate. It's a very respectable and
very profound and very serious way of life that
that fewer and fewer of us, uh, this, you
know, choose today but Charan was one of them.
And that's why I, I, it's worth, I think
it's worth following, it's worth paying attention to, it's
worth uh um uh at least considering. Mhm.
And so the last kind of failure and then
we'll get into some more general questions about failure
and its value is biological failure and you bring
up the example of Yukio Mishima. So could you
tell us about it?
Well, uh, he was, um, he was quite, quite
somebody. He was a Many of your viewers would
know a Japanese writer and playwright and, and he,
well, he started out as a writer, but he
ended up as being irritated at some point, he,
he was a bodybuilder and, and a performer, he
made movies and he, he acted in movies at
some point, he even was an orchestra conductor. I
mean, it's a, you, you, you wonder what he
was not, it's Uh, but, so you, you could
sense as you, as you read his story, as
you engage with his life, his biography, you could
sense a sense of this, uh, discontent. He was
not exactly happy. So even if he was, you
know, productive, successful, you know, novelist. Uh, YOU could
tell he at some point he becomes dissatisfied, disenchanted
with novel writing, and he wanted something else. He
wanted more, he wanted to experience. So he moves
quite a bit between, you know, genres and genres
and art forms and so on, but there is,
the crisis is growing, the crisis is growing, and
eventually, It's, it's, it's a very complicated story. We,
we cannot cover much here, but eventually he, he
ends up even building this private army, a private,
uh uh uh like a, like a small army
of, of private soldiers where, who are, whom he
indoctrinates and, uh, you know, uh uh feeds and,
and, and, and, and maintains, you know, out of
his own pocket. Um. You would say, I mean,
many, many, many historians and, you know, commentators said,
well, that's, he was a fascist, and he was,
uh, this, this, he was, he wanted to have
a private army to overthrow the government. Because he,
he ended up in a, he, he, he died,
he killed himself when he, he failed at overthrowing
the government. He basically staged a coup d'etat and
he failed and he committed suicide as a result,
but it's much more complicated. I, I, I tried
to, to explain some of that in, in, in
my book. It's, it's much more complicated. It's Uh,
you, you, you, you, you sense as you, as
you move on, that you really, what he planned
there, what he plotted was not the overthrow the
government plotted his own failure. He, he had this
dream at some point he starts fantasizing about his
being a samurai. Of course, samurai in Japan had
been outlawed in Japan for more than a century
when, you know, Japan became you know, chose to
be, to become westernized, the, the, the, the, the,
the, the class of the samurai was, was outlawed
and samurai were not in existence at the time.
However, he wanted to be one of them. So
he wanted to behave, he started behaving like like
like a samurai, inventing some kind of genealogical tree
for himself like a samurai genealogy. Uh, uh, YOU
know, picking up, or, you know, swords, um. You
know, picturing himself in the shape in the form
of a samurai. And of course, when you, when
you're a samurai, you adopt a certain code of
honor and you have everything is, is meaningful, everything
you do. And as part of that kind of
life, if you fail as a samurai, you have
to commit suicide. He wanted to commit suicide, he
was kind of He was, he was toying with
the idea of dying which he saw in, in
very strongly uh uh erotic terms, but he wanted
to, to, to die as a samurai. That's why
he kind of in, in my reading, he plotted
all that kind of, all that coup d'etat. But
he plotted it to fail. He never imagined, he
never wanted it to succeed, but he didn't want
to be, he, he never cared about taking, you
know, power or, or, you know, uh ruling Japan,
overthrowing the emperor, whatever. What he, all he wanted
was to, to fail spectacularly as a uh uh
in the process and as, as, as a result,
as any good sum. I would do to commit
suicide, to commit more exactly that kind of uh
ritual, ritual sepuu which was part of the, of
the samurai's uh way of life and, and death.
So it's a, it's a long, it's a, it's
a long quite, quite complicated story um of which
I, I could only mention a few moments here,
but it's something I would say it's something worth
uh worth uh exploring. Mhm.
And in this case, I mean, the ultimate kind
of biological failure, I would imagine is death. But
isn't the fact that death is a reality liberating
in a way? I mean, isn't it liberating to
know that whatever we might do achieve, or all
of our failures will not matter at all in
the end?
It should be, right? The way in which you
frame the question points to a certain understanding of,
of death, right? You say, you said death is
liberating, but uh you know, Not, not everybody sees
that in the, in those terms. It's uh we,
we normally, most of, most of us, I would
say, uh, tend to see that as some kind
of uh oppressive, uh, scary thing, event, right? It's
a, there's nothing liberating there. We stay, we try
to stay away from it, we postpone it, we,
we go to, you know, great lengths uh uh
to avoid it. So it's that, that, that time,
the way in which you, you, you frame that
uh is, is coming from a spiritual a certain
spiritual understanding of that, but ordinarily, ordinarily, we don't
do that. Ordinarily, we, we, we, we, we would
do anything. We would do anything not to, not
to be there, not to know that, as if,
of course, showing the process, there's nothing liberating about
it, but if, as you say, and Which, of
course, happens to be my own point of view
in the book. Um, THERE is something liberating because
you, you study, you know, the Western philosophy from,
it's a, the, the whole history of Western philosophy
is kind of, uh, uh, intimately connected to, to
the experience of death to Teaching word, trying, teaching
yourself that death is something to be embraced, that
is something exactly as you said, liberating. We have
to teach ourselves, you know, but it's a long,
difficult process. It takes a lifetime to do that,
to teach ourselves that, that it's a, there is
something liberating about it. It's a long, that's the,
that's. And you have that in Plato and in
so it's, it's a, the very moment of when
Western philosophy was born, that very notion was born
as well. So it's a very interesting how this
notion of philosophy as preparation for death, as training
for, for death as, as, as, as an death
as an experience, as a, as a liberating experience,
that very thing was born with the Western philosophy.
So let me read the quote from the book.
At a certain point, you say, quote, failure can
work wonders of self-realization, healing, and enlightenment. Could you
explain that?
Well, um, In the sense that uh uh uh
a mature, you know, a mature intelligent engagement with
failure, for example, admitting, uh, Recognizing your failures and
trying to understand what's behind uh processing them, you
know, uh. Working upon yourself, trying to, you know,
see things from a different angle. All of that.
Of, of course, in the first instance, is a
form of addressing failures, a form of, you know,
coming to terms with failures and so on. But
in the long run, that amounts, amounts to uh
to a well-lived life, to, to self-realization. It's if
you do that concept, if you manage to do
that, you know, on a daily basis, if you
manage to, to, to, to over, not just to
overcome your own limitations and your. On your own
imperfections and your own failures, but to kind of
place them into a bigger context and see them
as part of who you are and come, you
come to understand that we are, you are, each
one of us is a failed creature because we
are born imperfect, we are born to die. We
are finite, we are, you know, next to nothing.
Understanding all that in a, in a, in a,
in a, in a serious philosophical way, that's self-realization.
And that's, that comes with a kind of, it
comes with a high degree of, of Well, of
understanding, if you, if you manage to get there,
I, I think you understand quite a bit about
what it is to be human, about what, what's,
what should there be our expectations be, what should
we do? It's, it's kind of it, it puts
you in a very different place, a place for,
from where you can see things differently, not just,
you know, the practical things around you, but see,
you know, the big questions a bit different.
Do you think that it is possible for someone
to live without success?
No, I don't think the success, especially in the
sense in which we use the term before as
succession, that's impossible because, because we, we, we are,
we rely on those successions of events of, of
states, of, of, of, of things, right? So success
is, is there all the time, right? It's uh,
we, it's, it's, it's not possible because it's, it's
totally, it would be a totally unrealistic. We are
surrounded by success in that sense of succession. Uh
But, um, of course, we, we need to talk
about success in the other sense as well of
social success and so on. It would be depressing,
I would say it would be quite depressing. I,
my, my problem was not. Uh, IT'S not that,
it's we, we, we have success and we should
have, we should have. The problem is What do
you do when? You don't know how to. To
see beyond when you kind of, you, you get
intoxicated and, you know, um, yeah, intoxicated by because
every Social success and that's not in the mere
sense of succession of things, but in the sense,
in the more narrow sense of Um, social success,
career success comes with a high degree of intoxication.
We, when we experience, you know, big success in
our lives, we, so much, so much in our
lives becomes, you know, a blind spot. We, we,
we, we no longer see ourselves in, in a,
in a realistic light. We, we, everything is out
of proportion. There's so much that's Uh, falls into
oblivion. We don't, we are, we are actually those
moments of major social successes are really dangerous in
a sense because it's, it puts us, it places
us on an orbit that may, may lead us
in a dangerous space. We are no longer in
touch with who we are. It's kind of, it's
intoxicating and intoxication is not good.
So I have one last question then, in the
book, you, at a certain point, you talk about
the failure-based therapy. Could you tell us about that?
I mean, in what ways is it a therapy
and what is it about
exactly? It comes, uh, yeah, I guess the question
is related to your previous question. It comes with
a success thing, right? Um, FIRST of all, there
is a tradition of philosophy as, as therapy is
as old as perhaps philosophy itself, it shows up
in, in, in the Socrates because we just mentioned
him in poetus and in Buddhism and in so
many mountainous, so many in Niezsche, uh there is
uh this understanding of philosophy, philosophizing as as healing.
Uh, IT, it, it, uh, you, you, something happens
to you, you get, uh, really, you, you, you
get healed. If you engage properly with, with thinking,
philosophizing, philosophy etc. ON, uh, as a result, you
come up, you come, you come out, uh, uh,
uh, um, a healed person, uh, uh. But it's
a, it's, it's not, of course, uh in, in,
in, in, in this way in which I use
that phrase in the book is, is more metaphorical,
uh, failure-based, based therapy in the sense that we,
we should kind of Try to digest those failures
and turn them into, into health. We should not,
you know, just like I I said earlier, uh,
that success is intoxicating, inebriating, right? We can, we
can become drunk on success, which is very unhealthy
state to be. We can become healed if we
process our failures properly. There is this sense of,
of realism of, of, of um Yeah, even, even,
even sanity in, in, in, in, uh, that comes
from, from, not so much from failure, but from,
from what failure leads to, which is humility because
the point of the book is, is, is failure,
not failure, not for its own sake, but failure
as a way of humility. So for me and,
and, and that's the project of the book, uh.
The therapy, the healing comes from humility. It's you
you are brought down to earth, uh, that's, that's
humility. When you fail, you're brought down, you're brought
down to earth, you are humbled, and that's a
place to, to start again. That's uh, to start
better because you are, it's a place, it's a
place to, to, to, to, to be, to be
healed. All that, you know, flying around, all that,
you know, intoxication, those, those big dreams, those. Uh,
um, uh, MOMENTS of, of puberty of, of arrogance
and so on are not good for, for, for
your mental sanity, for especially for those around you
who see you as, as this arrogant, uh this,
this, this uh sufferable human beings. So that's the
humanity that comes from failure is, is, I, I,
I would say a key ingredient to that theory.
Great. So, the book is again in praise of
failure for lessons in humility. I'm leaving a link
to it in the description of the interview. And
caustic, uh, apart from the book, would you like
to mention any places on the internet where people
can find your work?
They can Google me Uh, they will find it.
I have no. No specific places to to.
OK. So thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show again. It's been
really nice to talk with you. Thank you so
much. Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview
until the end. If you liked it, please share
it, leave a like and hit the subscription button.
The show is brought to you by Nights Learning
and Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com
and also please consider supporting the show on Patreon
or PayPal. I would also like to give a
huge thank you to my main patrons and PayPal
supporters Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mullern, Fredrik Sundo, Bernard Seyches
Olaf, Alexandam Castle, Matthew Whitting Berarna Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Matter Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Neevs called Holbrookfield governor
Michael Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agns Fergalus and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Labrant John Jasent and Samuel
Corriere, Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France
David Sloan Wilson, asilla dearraujurumen ro Diego Londono Correa.
Yannick Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikolbar Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back
medicine, Gary Galman Samovalliriei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price,
Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Free Francaortolotti Gabriel Ponorteseus
Slelitsky, Scott Zacharyishim Dyani Smith Jen Wieman. Daniel Friedman,
William Buckner, Paul Georgianeau, Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous, Chris
Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, Diocosta, Anton Eriksson, Charles
Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists,
Larry D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey,
then Sperber, Robert Gray Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zu,
Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris
Tor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendon,
Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis,
Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud
Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursulauddinov, Gregory Hastings, David
Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Net. A
special thanks to my producers. These are Webb, Jim,
Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedic
Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo
Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my
executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and
Rosie. Thank you for all.